#Literature Survey for the project - Weather Prediction

Objective : Trying to predict the occurrence/formation of a hurricane over the seas using both recent and historical data obtained
from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration webpages. 
NOAA stores and manages a very extensively detailed database of all the buoy data.
A buoy is a floating device that can have many purposes.Sea buoys very frequently measure various 


Problem Statement: Trying to predict the occurrence/formation of a hurricane over the seas using both recent and historical data obtained
from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's sea buoy data.

Data: Data for our project consists of historical and realtime buoy data which is available on the NOAA's website separately for each
buoy. We are currently focussing on the hurricane "Irene". 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Irene
Hurricane Irene was a large and destructive tropical cyclone which affected much of the Caribbean and East Coast of the United States during late August 2011. The ninth named storm, first hurricane, and first major hurricane of the 2011 Atlantic hurricane season, Irene originated from a well-defined Atlantic tropical wave that began showing signs of organisation east of the Lesser Antilles. Due to development of atmospheric convection and a closed centre of circulation, the system was designated as Tropical Storm Irene on August 20, 2011. After intensifying, Irene made landfall in St. Croix as a strong tropical storm later that day. Early on August 21, the storm made a second landfall in Puerto Rico. While crossing the island, Irene strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane. The storm paralleled offshore of Hispaniola, continuing to slowly intensify in the process. Shortly before making four landfalls in the Bahamas, Irene peaked as a 120 mph (190 km/h) Category 3 hurricane.

We have a list of all the buoys which were in the trajectory of this particular hurricane. Using the historical data of 2011, we want to develop a model, which predicts the occurrence of a hurricane. The attributes being studied are wave period, wave direction, wave height, latitude, longitude, wind direction, wind direction, wind speed and pressure.
Sources :
National Data Buoy Centre,National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, October,2019.[Online].Available:https://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/
Measurement Descriptions and Units,National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,October,2019.[Online].Available:https://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/measdes.shtml



format:

4. Introduction to the context of the problem (why is it important?)
Hurricanes are one of the must destructive natural calamities. Category 5 hurricanes have costed thousands of human lives and upto
a maximum of 125 billion dollars in property loss. Many of the government operated hurricane management centres like THE NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTRE
and the CENTRAL PACIFIC HURRICANE CENTRE give an accurate prediction about the formation and the trajectory of the hurricanes using satellite imaging
upto 48 hours before. In most of the cases 2-5 days aren't enough for entire cities to prepare themselves for a hurricane. This is why
an early and accurate prediction of such calamities is very important.


5.https://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/outlooks/hurricane.shtml
The updated 2019 Atlantic hurricane Season outlook is an official product of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Climate Prediction Center (CPC). The outlook is produced in collaboration with hurricane experts from the National Hurricane Center (NHC) and the Hurricane Research Division (HRD). The Atlantic hurricane region includes the North Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea, and Gulf of Mexico.
Interpretation of NOAA's Atlantic hurricane season outlook:
This outlook is a general guide to the expected overall activity during the hurricane season. It is not a seasonal hurricane landfall forecast, and it does not predict levels of activity for any particular location.

Preparedness:
Hurricane-related disasters can occur whether the season is active or relatively quiet. It only takes one hurricane (or tropical storm) to cause a disaster. It is crucial that residents, businesses, and government agencies of coastal and near-coastal regions prepare for every hurricane season regardless of this, or any other, seasonal outlook. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the NHC, the Small Business Administration, and the American Red Cross all provide important hurricane preparedness information on their web sites.

NOAA does not make seasonal hurricane landfall predictions:
NOAA does not make seasonal hurricane landfall predictions. Hurricane landfalls are largely determined by the weather patterns in place as the hurricane approaches, which are only predictable when the storm is within several days of making landfall.

Nature of this Outlook and the "likely" ranges of activity:
This outlook is probabilistic, meaning the stated "likely" ranges of activity have a certain likelihood of occurring. The seasonal activity is expected to fall within these ranges in 7 out of 10 seasons with similar climate conditions and uncertainties to those expected this year. The ranges do not represent the total possible activity seen in past similar years.

This outlook is based on 1) predictions of large-scale climate factors known to influence seasonal hurricane activity, and 2) climate models that directly predict seasonal hurricane activity.




6. Proposed problem statement with the specific issue you intend to address
Trying to predict the occurrence/formation of a hurricane over the seas using both recent and historical data obtained
from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's sea buoy data atleast 7-10 days in advance. Forecasting right and 
forecasting early will be the goal as time is a very crucial factor which plays a vital role while taking appropriate 
preventive measures.

5. What have others done to solve it - critique others' approach and cite the work
(a) assumptions made, if any
(b) approach used - a summary
(c) summary of the results reported
(d) any limitations reported?
(e) any lacuna in their approach/ evaluation that you inferred?

Making predictions
ref: https://theconversation.com/how-meteorologists-predict-the-next-big-hurricane-102827
ref: https://www.wunderground.com/cat6/nhc-track-forecasts-best-ever-2017-no-improvement-intensity-forecasts
ref: http://web.mit.edu/12.000/www/m2010/teams/neworleans1/predicting%20hurricanes.htm


Hurricane forecasts have traditionally focused on predicting a storm’s track and intensity. 
The track and size of the storm determine which areas may be hit. 
To do so, forecasters use models – essentially software programs, often run on large computers.
Unfortunately, no single forecast model is consistently better than other models at making these predictions. 
Sometimes these forecasts show dramatically different paths, diverging by hundreds of miles. Other times, 
the models are in close agreement. In some cases, even when models are in close agreement, the small differences in track have very 
large differences in storm surge, winds and other factors that impact damage and evacuations.

So, forecasters use a collection of models to determine a likely range of tracks and intensities. 

Such models include the NOAA’s Global Forecast System and European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts global models.
The FSU Superensemble was developed by a group at our university, led by meteorologist T.N. Krishnamurti, in the early 2000s. 
The Superensemble combines output from a collection of models, giving more weight to the models that showed better predicted past 
weather events, such as Atlantic tropical cyclone events.
changes

limitations:
Over the past decade, track forecasts have steadily improved. 
A plethora of observations – from satellites, buoys and aircraft flown into the developing storm – allow scientists to better 
understand the environment around a storm, and in turn improve their models. Some models have improved by as much as 40 percent 
for some storms.
However, it’s extremely difficult for a model to estimate the maximum wind speed of a tropical cyclone at any given future time. 
Models are inexact in their descriptions of the entire state of the atmosphere and ocean at the start time of the model. 
Small-scale features of tropical cyclones – like sharp gradients in rainfall, surface winds and wave heights within and outside 
of the tropical cyclones – are not as reliably captured in the forecast models.

What are the problems with the current hurricane predictions?
Ref: http://web.mit.edu/12.000/www/m2010/teams/neworleans1/predicting%20hurricanes.htm
There have been great strides forward made in the science of forecasting hurricanes, 
but there is still a lot to do.  One major problem is accuracy.  The National Hurricane Center has been forecasting 
the paths of hurricanes since the early 1950’s.  They issue 120 hour, 96 hour, 72 hour, 48 hour, 24 hour, and 12 hour forecasts.  
(The 120 hour and 96 hour forecasts were introduced in 2003.)  The error decreases as the time before landfall decreases.  
The error has also decreased over the years as models become more accurate (NOAA, 2004).  Despite becoming more accurate, 
the error is still relatively large.

7.Our aim is to predict formation of hurricane accurately as early as possible. Since hurricane Irene was one of the largest and most destructive hurricanes, 
the aim is to observe the changes in weather data around the time when it occurred and fit an appropriate model to predict future occurrences in that area.



 